---
layout: post
title: "dancing with the machines"
description: ""
category:
tags: []
---

Computing is full of the terminology of dominance. We issue peremptory
orders at the command line, buttons are phrased in the imperative mood
(Start! Cancel!) - even the underlying database technology tends to
use "master" and "slave" to distinguish replica types (although this
is at least changing.)

This belies our actual relationship with the machine. We're slaves to
email, we compulsively check facebook, our phones jingle with likes
and notifications and affirmations of worth. Inbox zero is modern
sainthood.

What if we could choose a middle path? What if instead of dominating
or being dominated by the machine, we could dance with it instead?
Engage it at different timescales, both lead and allow ourselves to be
led?

anyway, this is why i like beeminder. I can choose, in a considered
moment, what I'd like to make of my life: what a good life looks like.
Later, in the hustle and bustle of actually living in it, I can trust
that I made good choices earlier and just mindlessly follow the
program: save the red bars before they explode, try to nudge the
yellow bars back into the green to make tomorrow a little easier.

you could call it gamification, but that'd be missing the point. In
this game, I'm pawn, player, and game designer too. There's no way to
win: you just keep finding ways to keep the game fun. The only way to
lose is to get bored with it and stop playing.

Carse talks about this with his concept of infinite games. What's
interesting to me about this is that you don't even need another
player: you can play with yourself, infinitely. <- lazy masturbation
joke goes HERE.

One of the interesting sides of this is that there are people who
don't appear to operate this way. My wife and at least one of my
co-workers is completely bemused by my elaborate self-deception
shenanigans. Head cocked to one side, she asks me in puzzled tones -
"if you know the things that you're meant to be doing, couldn't you
just, you know, do them?"

I'd love to know what it's like to live in that world. It sounds so
rational and orderly! Eat healthy food because it's what's good for
you - get your work done well in advance of the due date, because it
reduces stress. Do your tax in plenty of time, certainly never skip a
workout just because your chair is very comfortable or because you'd
prefer a long shower. Work on side projects regularly because it
sharpens your saw and that is self-evidently good, rather than on the
odd occasion the mood takes you.

I don't live in that world, though, and in retrospect, many of my
choices like learning Haskell as my primary language are optimised
both for being able to pick up a project again quickly, and for making
rapid progress when in the correct mood. My mania for the simplest
expression of a given computational idea has absolutely nothing to do
with aesthetics or high-mindedness: it's that I know that if I have to
churn out repetitive code, I'll never finish: like Gaiman's leprechaun
Sweeney, "the joyâ€™s gone out of me now, like the pee from a small boy
in a swimming pool on a hot day."

In essence, this is all a negotiation between different selves. If I
were properly, integratedly rational, the choice I would make at time
X for time X+N would be exactly the same as the one I would make if I
had to choose at time X+N. Indeed, when it's put like that, it seems
crazy to do anything else: it isn't as if I've gained any new
information. And yet, my self deciding what to do in the next minute
will almost always plump for video games, booze and chocolate, if not
somehow restrained. This is what beeminder gives me: between the
carrot of a weirdly atavistic pleasure seeing a red box go green and
the stick of losing cash if I fail to do so, I can asymptotically
approach being a rational agent.
